+++
title = "verytmp"
date = 2024-05-06
description = "Linux is secretly three garbage collectors in a trenchcoat."
+++

[`verytmp`][verytmp] came out of a previous employer's problem with badly behaved programs that weren't cleaning up large temporary files. Inevitably, someone who had to work with that code - and usually not the person who wrote the code! - would fill up their tempdir and spend a few minutes or hours being extremely confused about why other programs were suddenly throwing errors.

Our [local mad scientist][geofft] realized that this was obviously a problem for linux namespaces, and `verytmp` was born. By using (abusing?) a private mount namespace, `verytmp` takes advantage of the fact that [mount namespaces are garbage collected][ns] to give you a fully-functional in-memory filesystem that gets cleaned up when your process exits without relying on **any** userspace code. No more full `/tmp`, no more strange errors.

[The code is here][verytmp], and was a lot of fun to write. Because the goal is to create a detached mount namespace, you end up with a filesystem you can't reference with a absolute paths, which means that your API for accessing files and directories has to look a little bit different than the usual interfaces. Instead you end up with something a lot more like `openat2` and friends, which was both a fun exercise in API design and a fun excuse [to contribute openat2 bindings to the `nix` crate][pr].

[geofft]: https://twitter.com/geofft
[verytmp]: https://github.com/blinsay/verytmp
[pr]: https://github.com/nix-rust/nix/pull/2339
[ns]: https://unix.stackexchange.com/questions/212172/what-happens-if-the-last-process-in-a-namespace-exits
